---
permalink: /v1/network/
title: Network
keywords: network
last_updated: November 30, 2015
tags: [getting_started]
summary: ""
---

# The EXP Network

## Overview

The EXP network faciliates real time communication between entities on EXP. Users, devices, and consumer apps can communicate with eachother in real time.

Messages are send in the form of "broadcasts" and "responses". 



# Broadcasts

## Overview

A broadcast is made up of 3 user supplied components, the channel, the message name, and the message payload. Sending a broadcast is as simple as sending a HTTP POST to `/api/networks/current/broadcasts`.

```javascript
{
  "name": "myEventName",
  "payload": {
    "anything": 2,
    "anything2": ["hi!"]
  },
  "channel": {
    "name": "myChannelName"
  }
}
```








# Channels

## Overview

Channels provide namespacing for messaging and help reduce network traffic by routing messages to only devices that are actively listening on that channel. All messages on the EXP network are scoped by a channel.

In addition to the channel name, channels have two flags `system` and `consumer`. The full channel is defined by the combination of your organization, the channel name, and these two flags. In other words, messages with the same channel name, but one with `system=true` and one with `system=false` are **NOT** the same channel.


## System Flag

Messages sent directly by EXP will always have `system=true`. Messages not sent directly by EXP will always have `system=false`. Trying to send a message with `system=true` will result in an error.

## Consumer Flag

As consumer app credentials are typically delivered with a mobile application to consumer, messages from consumer apps should be treated with caution. For this reason, all messages coming from consumer app devices will and must have the `consumer` flag set to `true`. Consumer apps can also only listen for messages on channels with `consumer=true`. This allows non-consumer devices to communicate freely on non-consumer channels without having to worry about abuse of consumer app credentials.


## Advanced: Generating a Channel ID

Under the hood, channels are actually defined by a hash of the organization, name, and flags. This is refered to as the channel ID. The hash can be generated by creating a JSON string from the array [org, name, system, consumer] where system and consumer are 0 or 1 (0 for false, 1 for true). Urlsafe Base 64 encoding the resulting string is the channel id.


